Ali Akbar Sadeghi (born November 22, 1937; Persian: علی‌اکبر صادقی, also Romanized as "Ali-Akbar Sādeqi") a graduate of the College of Art, University of Tehran, is an Iranian painter and artist.

As a child, Ali Akbar Sadeghi reminisces that he would be lost in the chants of narrators that gave account of Shahnameh stories; accounts of Siavash riding on horseback, still-armored Bijan, Rostam’s arrow hitting Ashkbous in the heart, Faramarz, elephant rider, and bravery of other heroes whose names remain in Persian literature and Iranian folklore forever. In general, the lyrical, heroic world of legends is an indispensable part of Ali Akbar Sadeghi's worldview, a world whose figurative representations sometimes appear in old miniature paintings or more popular forms of art, including coffeehouse painting, reverse painting on glass, imprints on wood and paper, and stunning images in lithographed books.

He began to teach painting in high school in the 1950s before entering the university in 1958. His early works were with watercolor, but as of 1959, he began oil painting and drawing soon after entering college. He initiated a particular style in Persian painting, influenced by Coffee House painting, iconography, and traditional Iranian portrait painting, following the Qajar tradition – a mixture of surrealism influenced by stained glass art. He did his early works in graphics and illustration. [citation needed]

After the Iranian Revolution, Sadeghi seriously pursued painting. In 1989, he founded Sabz Gallery, which actively and continuously exhibited the works of Iranian painters until 2003.[citation needed]

Sadeghi has been artistically active for the past 60 years. [citation needed]

In his paintings, Ali Akbar Sadeghi draws on Persian art traditions but adds a surreal edge to them.[citation needed]

His style is a kind of Iranian surrealism, based on Iranian forms and compositions of traditional paintings, the use of Iranian iconography, and the use of Persian cultural motifs, signs and myths, full of movement and action, in prominent and genuine oil colors, in large frames, very personal, reminiscent of epic traditional Persian paintings and illustrations, with a conspicuous mythical style. He initiated a special style in Persian painting, influenced by Coffee House painting, iconography, and traditional Iranian portrait painting, following the Qajar tradition – a mixture of surrealism influenced by the art of stained glass.

The spectacular style and striking use of color in paintings and sculptures of Ali Akbar Sadeghi behold the richness of iconography in Qajar Era paintings, particularly a school of painting that has become known as the Qahveh Khaneh (Coffee house paintings). The meticulous detailing, intricate scenes and the subject matter, often heroes in full armor, follow the traditions of Miniature painting. At close inspection, many artists’ works are, in one way or another, self-portraits. The storyteller, the sleepwalker, seems unable to invent without identifying with the characters of his imagination. Here is a marvelous world where the heroes of artists do not appear to be fighting the world's evils; they are either frozen in time or seem to be engaged in their internal conflict. From the “Hanged Coat” to the depiction of the old hero with an aid band on his face to the “Torture Armchair”, there is a strong sense of defeat but evil doesn't seem to have prevailed. The artist appears content with the wisdom that age and years of turmoil have brought him. The Emotional power of these self-portraits and their poetic reality overwhelms the viewer and invokes feelings of sympathy from conflict within every human being. The surreal world of Ali Akbar Sadeghi is governed by the strength of dreams, a world of his own. He successfully transfers his emotions and turmoil but also creates scenes and objects that are complete and precise. A perfect balance. And when he is not busy pushing nails into his heroes' faces, he is ready to play chess. The game of nobility commands tact, maturity, and dignity.
