Eva Janina Wieczorek (born 23 May 1951) in Katowice in Poland. She is a visual artist.
490 / 5.000
She is a German painter, a draftsman and sculptor. She is an artist whose works were shown in prices, publications, collections and exhibitions in Germany, Great Britain, Croatia, Poland and Belgium. Your work is characterized by a powerful implementation of light and shadow and deal with current topics in our world. Many of their works are attributed to realism and surrealism. She lives and works in Brühl, Germany.

In Poland she finished an apprenticeship as a technician. When she was
young she was interested in painting, and her uncle, who was a painter, brought her in contact with the fine arts.
The artist studied privately  free art in the field of painting with Prof. Roman Kalarus at the Academy of Fine Arts ASP in Katowice Poland.
Starting with watercolours and acrylic paint she now works with oil on canvas paintings and Digital Drawings.

Since 2010, the artist has also turned to digital painting, inspired by David Hockney’s digital works. Even earlier, she was fascinated by the possibility of creating images using graphic software. This book provides a unique insight into Eva Janina Wieczorek’s versatility as a painter and illustrator in digital art. Her work encompasses a constant search for new forms of expression, as well as experimentation with the portrayal of women and children. Her keen sense of interpersonal relationships and interest in current fashion are also evident in numerous portraits, including those of well-known actors and singers such as Michael Jackson, Marilyn Monroe, and Whitney Houston. Additionally, she has created landscapes and underwater images, including works titled “Abgetaucht 1 and 2", “Botschaft” and “Schwimmbad”. Initially, she created her works with the help of templates or sketches on the screen. Nowadays, her pieces emerge spontaneously from mental images, often organized into color-themed series, resulting in over a hundred works1.

Eva Janina Wieczorek in Artprice.com https://www.artprice.com/artist/580764/eva-janina-wieczorek

Paintings and Digital Drawings https://www.epubli.com/shop/eva-janina-wieczorek-meisterwerke-9783753140285

German National Bibliothek https://portal.dnb.de/opac.htm?method=simpleSearch&cqlMode=true&query=idn%3D1224373227
