

Hassel Smith (born Hassell Wendell Smith Jr.; April 24, 1915 – January 2, 2007) was an American painter.

Hassel Smith was born in 1915 in Sturgis, Michigan to Hassel Wendell Smith Sr, a sales manager for the Kirsch drapery hardware company, and  later working in advertising, and Helen Adams Smith, both college graduates.[1] During childhood, because of his mother’s tuberculosis and the consequent search for a suitable climate for her health, Smith’s family moved home regularly. From Michigan they went to Denver, Colorado, and then Los Angeles, San Mateo and Mill Valley in California before returning to Michigan and then going back to San Mateo, where Smith attended San Mateo High School. He became an Eagle Scout at 15.[2]

Smith attended Northwestern University in Evanston, Illinois, from 1932 to 1936. He was initially a Chemistry major but was defeated in learning German, then a requirement for a science career. He changed to Art History and English Literature, the art course requiring the practise as well as the study of art. He later claimed that at this point began "my actual art career, my love affair with painting".[2] He graduated B.S. cum laude with majors in History of Art and English literature.

While in Chicago, Smith was excited by the Ballets Russes de Monte Carlo under Léonide Massine on their visit to the city. "I had never seen anything like it," wrote Smith later, "and became a balletomane, missing no performances, entranced by the dancing, the music ... the marvellous costumes and scenery."[2] More crucially, during 1932-34 he was exposed to paintings and sculptures exhibited at the World's Fair in Chicago. "The effect upon me of this experience was instantaneous and everlasting, a revelation", he wrote. "Lautrec, van Gogh, Gauguin, Seurat, Monet, Cézanne ... Miró, Brâncuşi, Léger, Duchamp, Matisse, Picasso, Mondrian, Dalí ... I was wowed by them all."[2] His experiences in Chicago were turning points in his development. 

Smith won a scholarship to Princeton University for graduate studies in history of art, but chose to spend two years (1936 to 1938) at the California School of Fine Art (now San Francisco Art Institute),[3] in the painting and drawing class of his mentor, Maurice Sterne. "I have no hesitation in saying that to whatever extent my intellect has been engaged in the joys and mysteries of transferring visual observations in three dimensions into meaningful two-dimensional marks and shapes, I owe to Sterne."[4]

Smith worked with derelict and alcoholic individuals on skid row in the Tenderloin district of San Francisco during the late 1930s. He described the task as "shattering"[5] and became active in left-wing politics. He received a Rosenberg Traveling Fellowship in 1941 for independent study, moving to the Mother Lode region in the Sierra Nevada of California. His work until the end of 1942 was made en plein air (outdoors) with a focus on town and landscape.

During World War II Smith was registered as a conscientious objector.[6]  He sought alternative service as a Farm Security Administration (FSA) camp supervisor at the Arvin Migratory Labor Camp and other camps nearby in the Central Valley of California. There he made powerful, rapid, documentary portraits of the rural poor picking cotton and other crops.[5] There, too, he met June Dorothy Myers, a social worker for the migrant labour program, and they married in September 1942[7][8] In 1944 the FSA was phased out and Smith was assigned as a log scaler in Oregon where he worked until the end of the war.

From 1945 to 1951 Smith was a celebrated teacher at California School of Fine Art working under director Douglas MacAgy,[9] and Clyfford Still, alongside Ed Corbett, David Park, Elmer Bischoff, Richard Diebenkorn and Frank Lobdell, among many other significant artists, filmmakers and designers.[3] He was influenced deeply by Still's 1947 exhibition at the Palace of the Legion of Honor, forming a friendship with the artist that lasted until Still's death in 1980.

From 1953 until late 1965 Smith lived in an apple orchard outside Sebastopol, Sonoma County in California, 55 miles north of San Francisco. There he painted in a self-built redwood-sided studio. His work from these years, referred to by critic Allan Temko as the "Thunderbolt period", had a significant impact on artists along the entire West Coast of the United States. Smith was one of the few artists, along with [[Sonia Gechtoff], Jay DeFeo and Bruce Conner, then based in northern California, to be exhibited in Los Angeles by Irving Blum and Walter Hopps at the Ferus Gallery during the late fifties and early sixties. Smith's shows at Ferus ensured his singular influence on southern California painters. His paintings were also shown in San Francisco, New York, London and Milan, and were acquired widely for both private and public collections.

June Myers Smith died of cancer at the age of 40 in August 1958.[10] Smith subsequently married Donna Raffety Harrington in 1959 (their son Bruce was born in 1960 - adding to Donna's sons Mark and Stephan, and Hassel and June's son Joseph). In 1962–1963 Smith moved for one year with his family to Mousehole in Cornwall, England, working in a studio on the quays at Newlyn.

During 1963-65 Smith taught part-time at the University of California, Berkeley. In 1965 he moved his family to Los Angeles, teaching at the University of California, Los Angeles. He had contact with several southern California artists, most notably the painter John Altoon.

Smith moved permanently to England in 1966, accepting a tenured teaching position at the Royal West of England Academy Art Schools in Bristol (later the West of England College of Art, now part of the Department of Creative Industries, University of the West of England).

Having returned to representational painting in 1964, Smith began the series of hard-edged "measured paintings" in 1970, which continued into the late eighties. He returned as guest professor to the West Coast periodically during the seventies, at UC Davis and SFAI. Major retrospectives followed at San Francisco Museum of Modern Art in 1975, and at Oakland Museum in 1981.

Smith retired from teaching in 1980 and moved to an eighteenth-century rectory at Rode, north Somerset. The following seventeen years were a prolific period with output in painting, drawing and printmaking. The final decade of work saw two significant stylistic shifts characterized by aspects of gestural abstraction. 

Illness forced suspension of work in late 1997. Hassel Smith died nine years later on January 2, 2007, in Wiltshire, England. Smith’s widow, Donna Raffety Smith, died in August 2024.

A British charitable organisation, the Hassel Smith Foundation, was set up in 2024 with the aim of establishing and maintaining a major collection of Smith’s work in order to exhibit it in a wide range of galleries, museums and public collections, and to enable access to digital images and original work for research and educational purposes.[11]

Smith’s son Bruce Smith is a prolific musician, playing with a number of bands who made a mark on the British post punk music scene.[12]

Hassel Smith exhibited extensively on both coasts of the US, and in western Europe, from the late 1930s onwards. His first noted solo exhibition was curated by Jermayne MacAgy[13] at the California Palace of the Legion of Honor, San Francisco, in 1947.

Group exhibitions with Elmer Bischoff, David Park, Richard Diebenkorn and Ed Corbett followed swiftly, during the late 1940s and early 1950s. Smith was included in the significant 1955 exhibition, Action Painting, at the Merry-Go-Round Building in Santa Monica, California curated by Walter Hopps. Five years later, Smith's first retrospective was curated by Walter Hopps at the Pasadena Art Museum (1961).

Smith joined the Los Angeles-based Ferus Gallery in 1958 and received four solo exhibitions over a five-year period. His work was featured in the Ferus retrospective at Gagosian in New York in 2002. Smith had regular exhibitions at the Dilexi Gallery[14] in San Francisco from the late 1950s until the gallery's closure in 1969. From the mid-1950s to the mid-1960s Smith exhibited at The New Arts in Houston, and at galleries in New York, London and Milan. In 1964 Smith was invited to participate in the Whitney Annual exhibition in New York and received a second retrospective at San Francisco State University. Major retrospectives followed at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art (SFMOMA) (1975) and the Oakland Museum (1981). Smith's work was included in the pivotal 1996 exhibition, The San Francisco School of Abstract-Expressionism, curated by Susan Landauer, at the SFMOMA.

Some of these paintings either tend to be or are about games, rules of the game and the strategies required to win without cheating. ALL of the paintings are about building, being in or getting out of cages, whether gilded or not. About being in and getting out of a cage while leaving the cage intact - Houdini stuff! The images include painting oneself into the middle of a room, papering over doors and windows, sitting on a limb while sawing it off next to the trunk.[15] (January 1977)

In auditory terms SILENCE is discernible only in relation to NOISE, the reverse being equally true. The two states are functions of one another. The corners of a canvas are events with a necessary dimensional "interval" between them but that does not imply that the interval is without "eventfulness," is in other words, "nothing."[16] (1980)

[...] as far as I am concerned I'm bringing the painting into much closer relation with music, the dance with verse, and the various discursive art forms in which rhythmic sequences play a role. (1988)[17]
