

Henri Michaux (French: [ɑ̃ʁi miʃo]; 24 May 1899, Namur – 19 October 1984, Paris) was a Belgian-born French poet, writer and painter. Michaux is renowned[1] for his strange, highly original poetry and prose, and also for his art: the Paris Museum of Modern Art and the Guggenheim Museum in New York had major shows of his work in 1978 (see below, Visual Arts). His autobiographical texts that chronicle his psychedelic experiments with LSD and mescaline include Miserable Miracle and The Major Ordeals of the Mind and the Countless Minor Ones.[2] He is recognised for his idiosyncratic travelogues and books of art criticism. Michaux is also known for his stories about Plume – "a peaceable man"[3] – perhaps the most unenterprising hero in the history of literature, a character subject to many misfortunes. 

His poetic works have often been republished in France, where they are studied along with major poets of French literature. In 1955 he became a citizen of France,[4] and he lived the rest of his life there. He became a friend of Romanian pessimist philosopher Emil Cioran around the same time, along with other literary luminaries in France. [5] In 1965 he won the grand prix national des Lettres, which he refused to accept, as he did every honor he was accorded in his life.[citation needed]

Japanese animator Ryo Orikasa adapted Michaux's poetry for the 2023 short film Miserable Miracle, winner of  the top animated short prize at the Ottawa International Animation Festival.[6]

In 1930 and 1931, Michaux visited Japan, China and India. The result of this trip was the book A Barbarian in Asia.[7][8][9] Asian culture became one of his biggest influences. The philosophy of Buddhism and calligraphy later became principal subjects of many of his poems and inspired many of his drawings. He also visited Ecuador and published a travelogue book of the same name.[10] His travels across the Americas finished in Brazil in 1939, and he stayed there for two years.

Michaux was a highly original visual artist, associated with the Tachiste movement in the 1940s and 50s, although that describes only a small part of his artistic achievement--for example, his hallucinatory representations of faces and heads. His work often makes use of dense, suggestively gestural strokes that incorporate elements of calligraphy, asemic writing, and abstract expressionism.  The Museum of Modern Art in Paris and the Guggenheim Museum in New York both had major shows of his work in 1978.

His complete works were published by Gallimard in three volumes of the Pléiade series, 1998-2004. Œuvres complètes, Paris, 1998-2004.
