

Matthias Weischer (born 1973) is a German painter living in Leipzig. He is considered to be part of the New Leipzig School.

Born in Elte, North Rhine-Westphalia, Weischer studied painting from 1995 to 2001 and received his MA in 2003 from Hochschule für Grafik und Buchkunst (HGB) in Leipzig. He was a student in the master class of Professor Sighard Gille. In 2002, he was a co-founder of the artist-initiated gallery LIGA in Berlin that was run by eleven former HGB students, among them Christoph Ruckhäberle, Tim Eitel, David Schnell and Tilo Baumgärtel. LIGA was closed after two years in 2004. After cooperating with Galerie Kleindienst (Leipzig), Anthony Wilkinson (London) and EIGEN + Art (Leipzig/Berlin) Weischer is currently represented by König Gallery (Berlin) and Grimm Gallery (Amsterdam). His studio is located at the Leipzig Cotton Mill.

Weischers works oscillate between abstract and figurative painting. Until 2006, his paintings depicted deserted interiors like stage settings that are infused with abstract elements. Furniture, everyday objects, and large-scale ornaments stylistically refer to the 1950s and 1960s. In their collage-like appearance, they establish a complex and ambiguous relationship.

During his residency in Rome in 2007, Weischer concentrated on drawing and studies on nature and landscape. Since then, he predominantly works on and with paper, in smaller formats and with a lighter range of colors. He also explores different printing techniques and, recently, three-dimensional sculptural arrangements.

Since 2001, his work has been exhibited worldwide, e.g. in London (2003), Miami (2004), at the Venice Biennale, the Cleveland Museum of Art, in Chungnam, Korea (2005), The Hague, Málaga (2008), Ponce, Puerto Rico (2011), Hong Kong (2015) and Amsterdam (2017).

Among the public and private collections holding works by Matthias Weischer are the Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles, Gemeentemuseum Den Haag, The Hague, Arken Museum of Modern Art, Denmark, Arario Collection, Corea, Museum der bildenden Künste, Leipzig, Rubel Family Collection, Miami and Susan and Michael Hort, New York.
