Nathan Isaevich Altman Russian: Натан Исаевич Альтман, romanized: Natan Isayevich Altman; Ukrainian: Натан Ісайович Альтман;  22 December [O.S.  10 December] 1889 – 12 December 1970) was a Russian avant-garde artist, Cubist painter, stage designer and book illustrator, who was born in Ukraine in the Russian Empire and worked in France and the Soviet Union.[1]

Altman was born in Vinnytsia, in the Podolia Governorate of Ukraine in the Russian Empire to a family of Jewish merchants. He studied in a religious Jewish school (cheder), then in a public elementary school in Vinnytsia. 

From 1902 to 1907, he studied painting and sculpture at the Grekov Art School in Odesa, Ukraine. In 1906, he had his first exhibition in Odesa.

In 1910, he went to Paris, where he stayed for one year. He studied at the Free Russian Academy in Paris, working in the studio of Wladimir Baranoff-Rossine, and had contact with Marc Chagall, Alexander Archipenko, and David Shterenberg. In 1910, he became a member of the group Soyuz Molodyozhi (Union of Youth). He also befriended Jewish intellectuals such as Chaim Nachman Bialik.

In 1912, Altman moved to Saint Petersburg. His famous Portrait of Anna Akhmatova, conceived in Cubist style, was painted in 1914. From 1915 to 1917, Nathan Altman was the teacher at Mikhail Bernstein's private art school. After 1916 he started to work as a stage designer.

In 1918, he was the member of the Board for Artistic Matters within the Department of Fine Arts of the People's Commissariat of Enlightenment together with Malevich, Baranoff-Rossine and Shevchenko. In the same year he had an exhibition with the group Jewish Society for the Furthering of the Arts in Moscow, together with Wladimir Baranoff-Rossine, El Lissitzky and the others. In this same year, he installed a temporary work of architectural sculpture in Palace Square to commemorate the 1st anniversary of the October Revolution.[2] The canvas was subsequently cut up and used for soldiers' foot bindings.[3]

In 1920, he became a member of the Institute for Artistic Culture (INKHUK), together with Kasimir Malevich, Vladimir Tatlin and the others. In the same year, he participated in the exhibition From Impressionism to Cubism in the Museum of Painterly Culture in Petrograd, Soviet Union (now Saint Petersburg, Russia). In 1921, he moved to Moscow. From 1921 to 1922 he was director of the Museum of Painterly Culture in Petrograd.

From 1920 to 1928, he worked on stage designs for the Habimah Theatre and the Jewish State Theatre in Moscow. In 1923 a volume of his Jewish graphic art, Evrejskaja grafika Natana Al'tmana: Tekst Maksa Osborna [Max Osborn], was published in Berlin.

In 1925, he participated in Exposition Internationale des Arts Decoratifs et Industriels Modernes (Art Deco) in Paris together with Aleksandra Ekster, Vadim Meller, Rudolf Frentz, Sonia Delaunay-Terk and David Shterenberg. His first solo exhibition in Leningrad, Soviet Union (now Saint Petersburg, Russia) was in 1926.

Altman moved to Paris in 1928. In 1936, he returned to Leningrad. He worked mainly for the theatre, as a book illustrator and an author of essays about art.

Nathan Altman died in Leningrad aged 81. The apartment building House of Specialists at 61-1 Lesnoy Prospekt features acommemorative plaque in honour of the artist.
