Lajos Vajda (Hungarian: Vajda Lajos; 1908, Zalaegerszeg – 1941, Budakeszi) was a Hungarian painter and graphic artist. From 1927 to 1930 he was a student of István Csók at the Royal Academy of Fine Arts.

Vajda stayed in Paris between 1930 and 1934 and, in addition to the most recent trends in French painting, he also got acquainted with the outstanding works of the Russian Realist film. This prompted him to create his dramatic photo-montages of the great cataclysms of mankind, war, hunger, armed violence and abject misery. From 1934 onwards, he collected folk art motifs in Szentendre and Szigetmonostor. In his style, folk art and Orthodox Christian, Roman Catholic and Jewish symbols were combined with abstract and surrealistic elements.  His last abstract surrealistic drawings foreshadow the horrors of World War II. He died of tuberculosis in 1941.

"Over a ten-year period, Vajda created an impressive oeuvre, the formal and content-related preoccupations of which were rooted in Constructivism and Surrealism. (...) His independence from the dogmas of these two movements, his great inventiveness and his use of local historical materials helped define the Hungarian avantgarde."[1]
Source:[2]

In this period Vajda “regards film to be the most appropriate artistic genre for expressing new endeavours. He recognises the crucial role of modern film. (…) The film director who creates meaning in random events and fates is capable of creating a new artistic worldview. This is the way Vajda approaches surrealism as a technique of creation. The photomontages made in Paris, and later the stream of many-layered drawing montages, collages and simultaneous compositions illustrate his artistic convictions: the problems of painting can be solved through ideas coming from the world of film.[21]

In Vajda’s photomontages “the extreme forces of the human world appear in a dramatic simultaneity: dead babies and decrepit old men, knife and bread, rifle and bird, tiger and lily: the jungle laws of the struggle for survival and pure flowers are composed into one picture in diagonals of tension.[22] These photomontages are completely different from the unreal Soviet propaganda montages of the age "with their monumental industrial machinery, dams and bridges".[23]

The photomontages are “mostly characterized by confronting extremes. It's as if each of these montages shows us a drama condensed into a single image. Various details cut out from newspapers and picture magazines, juxtaposed on neutral cardboard, result in an unusual tension.[24]

"In all his still-lifes from 1934, Vajda benefits from the results of a cubist approach. He turns space into a plane. The "self-containedness" of the picture is so intimate that, instead of a still-life, we seem to be given a glimpse into a hermetically sealed world. Yet the painting's methodically constructed, compact unity exudes the harmony of life. This, apart from other factors, is also due to two compositional features. The first one is the simultaneous inclusion of all possible viewpoints of the topic, the second one is that the planes that form the background of the picture tend to be involuntarily lengthened in the imagination."[25]
Returning to Hungary around 1935, Vajda started collecting motifs in Szentendre and its surroundings with his friend, Dezső Korniss. In addition to windows, house facades, gravestones, gate piers, he drew a kerosene lamp, a peasant's cart or a table with a knife, an apple and a loaf of bread on it. He was not so much interested in the origins of the motifs as in what they had become, what new meaning they had assumed within a particular location. At first, he drew the objects on the spot, later copying them onto each other. Sometimes he cut the drawings up and glued them together as a montage. Most of these pictures and drawings are composed in a circle, and all of them are without a concrete background.

In a letter to his later wife, Júlia Richter, Lajos Vajda describes his ambitions in the period between 1935 and 1937.

"We tend to be less emotional in the picture (which, however, does not mean that we banish human feelings from it), and we prefer to put the main emphasis on constructiveness, on the spatial shaping of the picture, and therefore we look for the subjects that correspond to our approach; that is, we look for what is closed, what is a formally clean and round unity. Architectural, geometric things with or without human figures. The landscape is inorganic and therefore inappropriate for expressing what we have to say. I have now experimented with how different objects from different environments, assembled on a picture plane, have an effect (constructive surrealist sematics)."[26]
The "constructive-surrealist sematics" quoted from the letter suggests that "Vajda really 'assembles' his motifs, stretching them onto the plane of the picture or creating an organic system out of them. The other element of the method, the surrealist approach, on the other hand, suggests that the individual elements fit together not only in terms of structure, but also along the lines of dreams and  the free associations of images."[27]
His motifs form an organic order. His working method is as follows: he cuts out his drawings and pastes them on the picture according to his own composition method and then paints over the picture. On his motif-collecting tours in and around the city of Szentendre, Vajda uses a constructive surrealist method based on the principle of montage to combine everyday and sacral objects, simplified into symbols, with folk motifs, as in his painting Houses at Szentendre with Crucifix. 
Based on the summer drawings, Korniss developed the drawings in the studio with oil and gouache, Vajda with tempera. On 11 August 1936, Vajda wrote to Júlia Richter, mentioning his best friend at the time, Dezső Korniss: "Let us examine two persons. They were both born in 1908, in "what used to be Great" Hungary. Vajda of Jewish descent, a Hungarian, influenced by Serbian culture. Korniss: born in Transylvania. (...) Our aspirations are to develop a new art specific to East-Central Europe, relying on the French and Russian influences of the two great European cultural centres. Hungary's geographical position in Europe predestines it to be a link between the West (French art) and the East (Russian art). We want to fuse together what is culturally (and in the visual arts) the artistic expression of the two types of people at these two poles: we want to be bridge-builders.[28]

Through a series of self-portrait icons, Lajos Vajda attempts to reconcile the individual and the communal forces, and the worldly and transcendent spheres. Self-Portrait with Icon and Upward Pointing Hand  is the artist's most important masterpiece. (The title of the picture was not given by the painter.[29])

We see two faces in the picture: a face showing the artist’s personal features and a spherical head. From the interpenetration of the self-portrait and the spherical head, a “third” portrait may emerge that has a “new message”. “This third portrait shows a head looking to the left consisting of the aura-radiating spherical head's arc and the eyes and nose-line of the personal self-portrait. Thus arises the “genuine face”, “the face of Man” uniting individual and accidental features with the divine icon's spherical head."[30] Other interpretations are also possible.[31])

"This triple portrait, formed from a multitude of dynamically flowing pastel patches, allows for multiple interpretations. In addition to the obvious identification whereby the first portrait is the individual, the faceless sphere is the universal, and the third image is the community sphere, the individual image can be seen as the representative of the body, the icon as the representative of the spirit, and the face resulting from the synthesis of the two as the representative of the soul. Nikolai Berdyaev,[32] a Russian Orthodox Christian philosopher, speaks of the icon as the expression of the relationship of the God-man that emerges from the two-way relationship between man and God. (...) In the portrait that emerged from the interpenetration of human and divine imagery, Vajda presented his 'true', definitive self-portrait of himself, the face of the artist who, through the power of art, could enter into a relationship with God, with the transcendent world beyond the tangible."[33]
Dark clouds loom on the horizon of Vajda's art. The possibility of achieving a synthesis disappears under the threat of fascism and Stalinism. Vajda, rejecting both fascist and Stalinist ideology, embarked on a path of personal religiosity.

From 1938 onwards, the Szentendre scenery disappears from his art. Its place is taken by strange, alien landscapes with frightening, sometimes strange masks or creatures combined with masks. Most of these works were done in pastel, and Vajda took full advantage of the possibilities offered by pastel. Later, the nature of the masks changes. The masks don't express anxieties and fears anymore, but they transport the viewer into another dimension. They all float into each other, transforming into a dreamlike turmoil, but they already anticipate the next stage in the development of Vajda's art.

"One of Vajda's major works from this period is the masterpiece titled Northern Landscape. The plane, divided into cold blue and brown surfaces, is divided only by shapes resembling icebergs and a shipwreck. No one since Caspar David Friedrich, one of the most brilliant representatives of German Romanticism, has been able to express with such poignant power the fragility of man's existence; man confronted with the emptiness of space and the boundlessness of nature, and also the vulnerability of man in the face of nature."[34]
Despite his worsening illness,\Vajda works through the summer of 1940, but he suspects that his journey has come to an end.
The flawless, charcoal-engraved forms, now yellowed to the bone, which pop up on large sheets of wrapping paper, have the weight of a vision. These flaming, fluttering shapes enter the internal self with the insistence of an afterimage of looking into the sun, exuding unease and ecstatic anxiety. There was every reason for this anxiety. On the one hand, there is the personal fate of Vajda himself: his increasingly hopeless struggle with his illness, with the shadow of an unwanted and feared death. On the other hand, there is the reality of the world war, which in the eyes of Vajda (and of many other European artists) becomes the tragedy of a civilisation that is based on humanist values and cultural traditions.[35]
